Introduce InstructLab Profiles Managed via `ilab profile...` to Run Key Commands at Different Fidelity Levels (#52)
instructlab/dev-docs: docs/lofi-hifi-backends.md

Currently all training is done via qlora or the like. Adding the following commands will enable higher fidelity training and introduce commands such as data mixing.

## Key Component

### Building off of the InstructLab Structure Redesign

After github.com/instructlab/instructlab/pull/990 is merged, ilab will use a parent -> child command structure. This proposal operates under that new structure.

This will be the new structure:

```console
ilab
|
|_______model
|       |
|       |____convert
|       |____download
|       |____train (--convert)
|       |____serve   (-i)
|       |____chat
|       |____inference
|       |
|_______data
|       |
|       |____generate
|       |
|_______config
|       |
|       |____init
|       |
|_______tax
|       |
|       |____diff
|       |____check
|       |____download
```

And this Will be the structure after these new commands are added:

```console
ilab
|
|_______model
|       |
|       |____convert
|       |____download
|       |____train (--convert)
|       |    |
|       |    |______lofi *

> |       |    |______hifi *

Reviewer: I think lofi and hifi probably make sense w.r.t. the models themselves. However, currently the size of the model is not the only differentiator between the correlating CLI and backend components. Many of the full-size workflows run a bunch of stuff that the CLI does not currently, and might not ever on a laptop.

Initially, we joked about specifying —turbo to run the backend version of a command, and using the laptop version by default. Whatever it is, I think the name should indicate that it’s not just using a higher fidelity model, but actually just a bigger workload in general.

> |       |    |______hifi *

Reviewer 2: I'm not a fan of any variation of "low" and "high" in the commands. I think it's too limiting. In practice, I expect we'll need more of a sliding scale over time and not a binary set of choices.

An alternative would be to expose more directly the algorithm we're talking about, and algorithm-specific tunables. 

* `ilab train qlora ...`
* `ilab train deepspeed ...`
* ...

something like that.

It's possible to also have an `ilab train auto` where we try to make some automatic decisions, or maybe even a set of t-shirt size type options geared at a range of resource profiles, but I think it may be premature to rush into those while things still seem to be evolving so much.

Reviewer: to add to this, I think that if a user tries to run `ilab train` by itself, they should be shown a help message outlining the choices and outlining hardware limitations and other considerations of each, e.g.
```
usage: ilab train <training_algo>

Available Training Options:
  qlora: Requires n GPUs, m GB RAM | suitable for running on laptop...
  fsdp: Requires n GPUs, m GB RAM | suitable for running on RHEL AI/larger infra...
```

@RobotSail also brought up the brilliant suggestion of having it interactively help the user choose, which I am very much on board with.

Author: no longer relevant due to doc overhaul, resolving

A new potential concept is an additional config.yaml which points to optional configuration that runs more data generation. This configuration can either live in the profile or once the user points to it, could be expanded to live in the profile. This might make the most sense for continuity.

mixing of the generated data before training will occur as part of generation. If we choose to expose options for data mixing to the users, these would be some of the options we need:

--num-util-proc=int
--output-dir=str (defaults to generated/mixed)
--knowledge-recipes=[]str (path to yaml)
--skill-recipes=[]str (path to yaml)

These can be introduced to either the profile where applicable or as flags if they are highly dynamic.

### `ilab model evaluate full` AND `ilab model evaluate checkpoint`

instructlab will run MMLU bench and MT bench in upcoming releases. These benchmarks are useful for inter-checkpoint evaluation and full scale evaluation at the end of multi-phase training.

MMLU bench needs the following options:
- --model
- --tasks
- --few-shots (int)

> - --batch-size

Reviewer 3: Should this be tuned based off #gpus in config rather than a separate param?

> # Introduce Instructlab profiles managed via `ilab profile...` to run different key commands at different Fidelity levels

Reviewer 2: I think it's worth changing the filename to reflect the latest approach.

Reviewer 2: This first line reads more like a summary than a title. I would shorten it to something like:
```suggestion
# InstructLab Training Profiles
```

> This document describes adding different data generation, mixing, and training backends to `ilab` to enable higher fidelity training using the backend code. By higher fidelity we mean models that preform better, were trained on better hardware, off of larger data sets and using more intensive training techniques.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document describes adding different data generation, mixing, and training backends to `ilab` to enable higher-fidelity training using the backend code. By higher fidelity, we mean models that perform better, were trained on better hardware, off of larger data sets, and used more intensive training techniques.
```

Reviewer 2: Can we scope this down to training only?

> Rather than augmenting the existing commands to have conflicting and confusing flags that the team will be forced to maintain, deprecate, and add onto, I am proposing we open the door to these new workflows via instructlab "profiles" and the `ilab profile` command group. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Rather than augmenting the existing commands to have conflicting and confusing flags that the team will be forced to maintain, deprecate, and add onto, I am proposing we open the door to these new workflows via instructlab "profiles" and the `ilab profile` command group.
```

> Currently all training is done via QLoRA or the like. Adding the following commands will enable higher fidelity training and introduce commands such as data mixing.

Reviewer 2: > or the like

Is it just QLoRA?  Is it more?  If it's more, can we name it?

I'd like to request dropping the data mixing part and let's just focus on training.  Containing the scope will make it easier to get this done.

> This document focuses primarily on training, specifically different configuration types or "profiles" for `ilab model train`.

Reviewer 2: Ah ha - here you clarify the doc really is intended to be focused on training. I think removing earlier references to other topics would help.

## Key Component

### Building off of the InstructLab Structure Redesign

> After <https://github.com/instructlab/instructlab/pull/990> is merged, ilab will use a parent -> child command structure. This proposal operates under that new structure.

Reviewer 2: Just a style thing - when referring to a literal command, wrap it in backticks

```suggestion
After <https://github.com/instructlab/instructlab/pull/990> is merged, `ilab` will use a parent -> child command structure. This proposal operates under that new structure.
```

> `ilab model train` will still be a single command offered to users. However, new "profiles" offered by the CLI will enable users to toggle what mode they are running instructlab in. These profiles will initially just have global options for training. Rather than adding dozens of flags to the CLI, storing them in "pre-baked" configs is a good first step.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`ilab model train` will still be a single command offered to users. However, new "profiles" offered by the CLI will enable users to toggle what mode they are running `ilab model train` in. These profiles will initially just have global options for training. Rather than adding dozens of flags to the CLI, storing them in "pre-baked" configs is a good first step.
```

> Eventually, we will want to enable a `ilab profile init` command that will allow users to initialize a custom profile based off of one of the pre-baked ones. This is not targeted for an upcoming release though. 

Reviewer 2: This seems more like a configuration thing managed under `ilab config` if it will have a CLI interface for editing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Eventually, we will want to enable an `ilab profile init` command that allows users to initialize a custom profile based on one of the pre-baked ones. This is not targeted for an upcoming release, though.
```

> ### Immediate Goals

Reviewer 2: Could you add a new section called something like "UX Overview" that walks through what the experience would look like to a user?

I know the commands are scattered throughout the doc, but there's a lot of discussion around each one. A focused look at the UX (a tl;dr of the commands) would help.

> For the near future, a single upper level profile that can be initialized via `ilab profile set <profile_name>`

Reviewer 2: This reads like a sentence that hasn't been completed

A profile can be either a json or yaml object that would look something like:

```yaml
profile:
    train:
        gpus: 0-4
        epochs: 15
        accelerator: deepspeed
        ds_config: foobar.json
```
Eventually this profile would have settings for generation, eval, etc. But for immediate goals, hardcoded training settings is the MVP. Rather than having a `--config` option at the `ilab model train` level, storing the profile at the global level allows us to expand this idea to other ilab commands in the future. We need to be careful about how we introduce new concepts like this.

> For immediate releases I would introduce the idea of a profile, a command to set a specific profile, and hardcoded profiles that plug into key ilab commands namely training.

Reviewer 2: This idea that a profile is not specific to training seems like a critical detail of this proposal.

My expectation was something very focused on training.

A global profile for everything is just the existing configuration file. You can have multiple configuration files if needed. I'm having a hard time deciding how this would end up being significantly different.

I think you're proposing a set of options that are supported in the config file but NOT via command line arguments. Is that right?

Honestly I think I'd rather just have all the command line arguments PLUS an extra one `--profile` that's shorthand for a set of defaults.

Author: also, this is the design doc for friday's design freeze so it needs to consider all commands being added

### Reasoning

The underlying training, eval, and generation libraries will handle the specifics based off of the config provided via the profile. For example is a user passes CPU training, no Deepspeed/FSDP etc then the training library will run the equivalent of "linux_train" that currently exists, outputting a model ready to be used. If the user has 4 GPUS, Deepspeed enabled and 15 epochs, the training library might give you a series of checkpoints.

> `ilab checkpoint evaluate` will be used in conjunction with `ilab model train` when the user is running multi-phase training. This command will run full scale inter-checkpoint evaluation on the given directory. An output dir will then hold then best checkpoint and all necessary data to run another `ilab train phased` command on.

Author: I think we agreed on no orchestration, but I could be convinced to add a `--eval` flag to training.

> `ilab checkpoint evaluate` will be used in conjunction with `ilab model train` when the user is running multi-phase training. This command will run full scale inter-checkpoint evaluation on the given directory. An output dir will then hold then best checkpoint and all necessary data to run another `ilab train phased` command on.

Reviewer 3: I am not sure what would make that be considered orchestration.  I wouldn't have said it's simply something that takes multiple steps.  Training is already multiple steps per phase.  Eval of a checkpoint dir is also multiple steps.  Generally I think of orchestration as involving more complex workflows or coordinating parallel processes.  The question I have here is what's the desired input/output flow from a user perspective.  Specifically, what's the reason(s) a user would like a separation between the train and eval of each phase?

> `ilab checkpoint evaluate` will be used in conjunction with `ilab model train` when the user is running multi-phase training. This command will run full scale inter-checkpoint evaluation on the given directory. An output dir will then hold then best checkpoint and all necessary data to run another `ilab train phased` command on.

Reviewer 3: One more potential thing to think about here. If we ever want to point ilab at a remote API to perform these actions, would that change the answer for what the desired user experience would be?

### Implementation specifics for `ilab model train`

ilab model train will maintain all of its current flags which will represent overrides for the values stored in the training section of a user profile. This means all of the existing flags will be ported to a default config with sane values set for all that are applicable. Some flags that change frequently like `--data-dir` and `--model-dir` for phased training will be added to the training command.

The existing code which runs the HF trainer will be ported to another library which can also run multi-phase training. This library will be shelled out to using torchrun.

some new entries in the config file that will not be exposed as user level flags are:

- accelerator=str (deepspeed, fsdp) describes the optimizer framework to use during training
- gpus=str describes the amount of GPUs (of what is available) to use for this process. This comes in the form of: 0-1, 8, etc.

> - ds_config=str desceibes a path to a .json file configuring deepspeed. 

Author: sure!

```yaml
profile:
    train:
        gpus: 0-4
        epochs: 15
        accelerator: deepspeed
    generate:
        gpus: 1-2
        num_instructions: 1000
        taxonomy_path: /path/to/large/taxonomy
        num_grounded_questions: 10
        num_samples: 10
        ...
```

A lot of this exists in the current `config.yaml` structure. We could place this profile into config.yaml with these entries embedded into it. Though, seperating performance related entities out of config.yaml and into these profiles makes more sense in the long run. 

some new entries like num_grounded_questions, num_samples, gpus will only exist in the profile but existing flags will remain as overrides for the profile values.

### ilab data mix

This command would take something like the following arguments

--num-util-proc=int
--output-dir=str (defaults to generated/mixed)
--knowledge-recipes=[]str (path to yaml)
--skill-recipes=[]str (path to yaml)

Similar to data generation and model training, performance related flags should be baked into a profile if any exist.

> ### ilab model evaluate full AND ilab model evaluate checkpoint

Reviewer 3: There would be a difference between checkpoint and basic model eval from an input and output perspective though.  Checkpoint eval takes a directory of models and outputs a winner.  Model eval takes a single model and outputs the scores.  Perhaps that would be a better way to focus the experience.  eval and compare vs eval.

> ### ilab model evaluate full AND ilab model evaluate checkpoint

Author: I switched this to a single cmd that just takes bench info

This command will take something like the following flags:

> --benchmarks [mmlu, mt, pr-mmlu, pr-bench (mt-pr)] default: (mmlu)

Author: good point, no default it is

    - you can only run certain benchmarks depending on what type of evaluation you are doing. 
Note: We could have `ilab model evaluate` as a single command and take flags that depend on each other like `--checkpoint-dir` and `--benchmarks` but in general, with the new CLI design we are trying to get out of the habit of flags that depend on each other.
--output-dir: str, determines where the best checkpoint is put for the next phase of training

> --input-dir: str, takes the directory of the model/checkpoint to evaluate. 

Author: unsure, @alimaredia @alinaryan @nathan-weinberg what is the format of passing a model vs checkpoint dir in the evaluation library? I have never run eval

> --input-dir: str, takes the directory of the model/checkpoint to evaluate. 

Reviewer 3: The current design:

https://github.com/instructlab/eval/pull/6/files

Is eval would take a single model.  So for a checkpoint the caller would need to look through the checkpoints and pass each model 1x1.

# Introduce Commands that Run Jobs with Different Fidelity levels for Key ilab functions

> This document describes adding different data generation, mixing, and training backends to ilab to enable higher fidelity training using the backend code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document describes adding different data generation, mixing, and training backends to `ilab` to enable higher fidelity training using the backend code.
```

> Currently all training is done via qlora or the like. Adding the following commands will enable higher fidelity training and introduce commands such as data mixing.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Currently all training is done via qlora or the like.
```
nit: can we be a bit more specific here

> 

Reviewer 2: A major part of this proposal is integrating phased training, though it doesn't really explain anywhere what that means. It would be helpful in the introduction to recap the current state of training support and then introduce the major new training capabilities proposed here. You can refer back to the original Lab paper for a more detailed description.

https://arxiv.org/html/2403.01081v3

The same issue applies to data generation. The doc doesn't really explain why `lofi/hifi` commands are necessary. An overview of the current state, plus an overview of what's proposed to be added, along with why it needs to be a separate command, would be helpful.

If you don't want to get into all of that for the data generation side, you could focus this proposal on training only.

> 

Reviewer 2: Another thing that would be helpful up top is to define "high fidelity" more clearly up front. It's used to describe a use case, but that use case isn't really clear from reading the doc.

## Key Component

### Building off of the InstructLab Structure Redesign

> After github.com/instructlab/instructlab/pull/990 is merged, ilab will use a parent -> child command structure. This proposal operates under that new structure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After <https://github.com/instructlab/instructlab/pull/990> is merged, `ilab` will use a parent -> child command structure. This proposal operates under that new structure.
```

This is the proposed new structure under the above Enhancement:

```console
ilab
|
|_______model
|       |
|       |____convert
|       |____download
|       |____train (--convert)

> |       |____serve   (-i)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|       |____serve
```

|       |____chat
|       |____inference
|       |
|_______data
|       |
|       |____generate
|       |
|_______config
|       |
|       |____init
|       |
|_______tax
|       |
|       |____diff
|       |____check
|       |____download
```

And this would be the structure after these new commands are added:

```console
ilab
|
|_______model
|       |
|       |____convert
|       |____download
|       |____train (--convert)
|       |    |
|       |    |______integrated *

> |       |    |______phased *

Reviewer 2: I don't understand what `integrated` means here. It seems to imply that other types would not be integrated. ... but integrated with what?

Some other ideas:

- `simple` and `full`
- `fast` and `full`

I know, naming is hard ...

Author: no longer relevant due to doc overhaul, resolving

|       |

> |       |____serve   (-i)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|       |____serve
```

Author: no longer relevant due to doc overhaul, resolving

|       |____chat
|       |____inference
|       |
|_______data
|       |____generate
|       |    |
|       |    |______lofi * (name pending)

> |       |    |______hifi * (name pending)

Reviewer 2: seems like we should be able to land on consistent names since the pair of options is similar in spirit to the train case.

Author: no longer relevant due to doc overhaul, resolving

|       |

> |       |____mix *

Reviewer 2: Do you have more detail about why `data mix` is separate from `data generate` ? I expected it to be included in the `generate` step.

Is there a clear case for running mixing separately?

@oindrillac @aakankshaduggal

Author: leaving this one open even though this part of the doc is gone, I was under the assumption that mixing would be its own command if not then I am fine with removing all mentions of it in the doc

|       |
|       |
|_______checkpoint
|       |
|       |____evaluate *
|       |
|_______config
|       |
|       |____init
|_______tax
|       |
|       |____diff
|       |____check
|       |____download
```

> The starred commands are the new ones under the redesigned structure. We are opting to add integrated and phased as commands under train and lofi/higi under generate rather than flags given their completely different functionality and backend structure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The starred commands are the new ones under the redesigned structure. We are opting to add integrated and phased as commands under train and lofi/hifi under generate rather than flags given their completely different functionality and backend structure.
```

Author: no longer relevant due to doc overhaul, resolving

> These commands would connect to the instructlab backend, which will be in the form of libraries. The lower fidelity commands if accepted will be the equivalent of what currently exists for generate and train. qlora, with pytorch, mlx, etc.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
These commands would connect to the planned InstructLab backend libraries. The lower fidelity commands will be the equivalent of what currently exists for generate and train in the existing CLI code - QLoRA, with pytorch, mlx, etc.
```

Reviewer 2: You don't connect to libraries, so how about:

```suggestion
These commands would make use of new InstructLab libraries. The lower fidelity commands will be the equivalent of what currently exists for generate and train in the existing CLI code - QLoRA, with pytorch, mlx, etc. 
```

Author: no longer relevant due to doc overhaul, resolving

> The Higher Fidelity versions would validate the existence of hardware that can properly run the generation, mixing, and training backends. At least for training, the existing infrastructure simply shells out to various python scripts, libraries, etc. So, as long as we combine this backend code into a place that can be imported into ilab without breaking other dependencies, this should be more of a structural change than a functional one. We know the backend code works on an isolated system, we just need to make it pluggable.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Higher Fidelity versions would validate the existence of hardware that can properly run the generation, mixing, and training backends. At least for training, the existing infrastructure simply shells out to various python scripts, libraries, etc. So, as long as we combine this backend code into a place that can be imported into `ilab` without breaking other dependencies, this should be more of a structural change than a functional one. We know the backend code works on an isolated system, we just need to make it pluggable.
```

Author: no longer relevant due to doc overhaul, resolving

> The Higher Fidelity versions would validate the existence of hardware that can properly run the generation, mixing, and training backends. At least for training, the existing infrastructure simply shells out to various python scripts, libraries, etc. So, as long as we combine this backend code into a place that can be imported into ilab without breaking other dependencies, this should be more of a structural change than a functional one. We know the backend code works on an isolated system, we just need to make it pluggable.

Reviewer 2: This assumes a bit of knowledge of code that most people can't see. I'm not sure that referencing that code is important. Could you focus on the proposal?  Does it come down to -- "we propose integrating additional training code into the instructlab repository that will be run directly as part of the `ilab` process" ?

Author: no longer relevant due to doc overhaul, resolving

> High Fidelity can run locally on someone's laptop or desktop and even utilize deepspeed if they have GPUs. In a more powerful system, the user can also run it in a container, utilize deepspeed and potentially even distribute the workload accorss machines using torch.distributed.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
High Fidelity can run locally on someone's laptop or desktop and even utilize deepspeed if they have GPUs. In a more powerful system, the user can also run it in a container, utilize deepspeed and potentially even distribute the workload across machines using `torch.distributed`.
```

Author: no longer relevant due to doc overhaul, resolving

> High Fidelity can run locally on someone's laptop or desktop and even utilize deepspeed if they have GPUs. In a more powerful system, the user can also run it in a container, utilize deepspeed and potentially even distribute the workload accorss machines using torch.distributed.

Reviewer 2: > High Fidelity can run

How about calling out the exact command like: `ilab train phased` can run ...

> In a more powerful system, the user can also run it in a container,

Why is a more powerful system required to be able to run `ilab` in a container? That seems doable on any level of system.

> even distribute the workload accorss machines using torch.distributed

Is the proposal that this is automatic? Or are you suggesting there is an optional action a user could take?

Author: no longer relevant due to doc overhaul, resolving

though, I think in order to auto assign a profile in the future we will need to somewhere check hardware the user has?

A key component here too is checkpoint evaluation. We want users to be able to have an understanding of model checkpoints starting with the ability to run evaluation on them in between phased training runs. The output of `ilab checkpoint evaluate` will tell the user what to point `ilab model train phased` arguments towards.

### Reasoning

> Plugging into hardware acceleration and multi-phase training is the logical next step for ilab. Ensuring we do this in a clean way that does not overload our current commands is also crucial. Many of the processes in the backend are confusing so we want to abstract some of the steps away from users while also giving them a reasonable amount of choice in configuring these new processes. However, maintaining the current laptop story is important to users without hardware access. Splitting these two paths into separate commands maintains the integrity of each.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Plugging into hardware acceleration and multi-phase training is the logical next step for `ilab`. Ensuring we do this in a clean way that does not overload our current commands is also crucial. Many of the processes in the backend are confusing so we want to abstract some of the steps away from users while also giving them a reasonable amount of choice in configuring these new processes. However, maintaining the current laptop story is important to users without hardware access. Splitting these two paths into separate commands maintains the integrity of each.
```

### ilab model train integrated

This command would take something like the following arguments

> --gpus=str , describes the amount of GPUs (of what is available) to use for this process. This comes in the form of: 0-1, 8, etc.

Reviewer 2: How about a default to use all?  `-1` perhaps

Author: its a str, so `all` probably

Author: there is some standard notation for this sort of GPU referencing, let me look for that

> --quantize=bool, enabled Qlora which basically loads the model in a quantized form so it can fit on a consumer GPU

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
--quantize=bool, enable Qlora, which loads the model in a quantized form so it can fit on a consumer GPU
```

--optimizer=str (deepspeed, fsdp) describes the optimizer framework to use during training
--learning-rate, int (?)
--batch-len=int
--input-dir=str, describes where the generated+mixed data lives to be trained on.
--model-name=str, name of the model to be output
--output-dir=str, where to put the model after training
--num-epochs=int, the amount of epochs to run in this phase of training
--device=str, the accelerator to use: cuda,rocm,cpu,mlx,mps
++ many of the current train flags probably

#### Implementation Specifics

The Transformers library (which is currently what we use for training along with torch) has options for fsdp, deepspeed, and many of the related arguments currently in use elsewhere in the project. My idea here is to try and use these as best as we can in the CLI rather than make our own custom versions that we then have to maintain.

> There might be a usecase for kicking off some custom deepspeed code for more in depth inter-checkpoint eval. That would be the point of the `phased` command. The phased train command is meant to be run in conjunction with `ilab checkpoint evaluate` which will give the user the best checkpoint to run the next phase on. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There might be a use case for kicking off some custom deepspeed code for a more in-depth inter-checkpoint eval. That would be the point of the `phased` command. The phased train command is meant to be run in conjunction with `ilab checkpoint evaluate`, which will give the user the best checkpoint to run the next phase on. 
```

> Keep in mind though, this is the community CLI! I feel as though we should try to find a middle ground between server usecases and community usecases. Having the default path in the InstructLab CLI be torch+transformers makes sense for the following usecases:

Reviewer 2: Community and Server are not separate things. Community is inclusive of all use cases.

```suggestion
 I feel as though we should try to find a middle ground between server use cases and laptop use cases. Having the default path in the InstructLab CLI be torch+transformers makes sense for the following use cases:
```

Reviewer 5: I think it's best to avoid using `I`, so this will feel more like a general document.

1. Developer with a Gaming PC:
    * Transformers+Pytorch support Qlora&&FSDP. While deepspeed might be a more "server-rack" use-case, having multi-phase training in the CLI for anyone with a consumer GPU makes sense.

> 2. Someone interested in ML, has a Homelab, or *anything with 2 GPUs*

Reviewer 6: What about the basic consumer laptop with GPU like Mac M-Series?

    * Trandformers+Pytorch supports Deepspeed on a single system spreading the training over the GPUs. Any professional or Hobbyist that has 2 GPUs will be looking for this option
3. The laptop usecase
    * Maintianing Qlora as the performant training mode for the laptop is crucial as most people cannot handle the full models. However, unlocking some better results by using FSDP+Qlora could improve local results and get people more interested in InstructLab.

> The above usecases create a spectrum of possibility of what users can do with ilab! adding `ilab model train lofi/hifi` each with different options for optimizers: Adam (default, Qlora), FSDP (Qlora OR Non-Qlora train), and Deepspeed (Non-Qlora, multi GPU) increase the amount of situations where ilab is viable. Adding other options like --multi-phase, --learning-rate, etc give the user granular control over this new multi-phased training approach.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The above usecases create a spectrum of possibility of what users can do with ilab! adding `ilab model train lofi/hifi` each with different options for optimizers: Adam (default, QLoRA), FSDP (QLoRA OR Non-QLoRA train), and Deepspeed (Non-QLoRA, multi GPU) increase the amount of situations where `ilab` is viable. Adding other options like `--multi-phase`, `--learning-rate`, etc., give the user granular control over this new multi-phased training approach.
```
`lofi`/`hifi` references need to be removed (probably should change the PR title as well)

### ilab model train phased

This command would take roughly the following arguments

--optimizer=str (deepspeed, fsdp) describes the optimizer framework to use during training
--device=str , accelerator to use cpu,cuda,rocm,mlx,mps
--model-dir=path , dir where the model to be used in this phase is located

> --data-dir=path , dir where the data for this phase is located

Reviewer 2: There are a lot more options in the previous train command. There are some that still seem relevant like input-dir, model-name, output-dir

> Note there is no Lora in this command and there is no quantization. The `ilab model train integrated` command will use the transformers library with pytorch. This is because those have awesome plugins for deepspeed and fsdp WITH lora and qlora. Those are absolute necessities for community usecase. However, they will be mostly unused in the "High Fidelity" usecase.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Note there is no LoRA in this command and there is no quantization. The `ilab model train integrated` command will use the transformers library with pytorch. This is because those have awesome plugins for deepspeed and fsdp WITH LoRA and QLoRA. Those are absolute necessities for community usecase. However, they will be mostly unused in the "High Fidelity" usecase.
```

> Note there is no Lora in this command and there is no quantization. The `ilab model train integrated` command will use the transformers library with pytorch. This is because those have awesome plugins for deepspeed and fsdp WITH lora and qlora. Those are absolute necessities for community usecase. However, they will be mostly unused in the "High Fidelity" usecase.

Reviewer 2: similar comment about the use of "community" here -- that's not a use case differentiator

### ilab data generate hifi

This command would take something like the following arguments

--num-samples=int
--num-grounded-questions=int
--num-gen-proc=int
--num-util-proc=int (or is this for mixing?)

### ilab data generate lofi

This command would be the same as the existing `ilab generate`

### ilab data mix

This command would take something like the following arguments

--num-util-proc=int
--output-dir=str (defaults to generated/mixed)
--knowledge-recipes=[]str (path to yaml)
--skill-recipes=[]str (path to yaml)

> * Do we need an `ilab recipe` cmd? *

Reviewer 2: What does this mean?

Author: removed, this was an old thought

## Workflows

### ilab model train integrated

A user on a Desktop with a consumer GPU (assume RTX 20/30 series) would run something like

`ilab model train integrated --device=cuda --quantize --optimizer=deepspeed --num-epochs=5`

This would 
1. load the model in 4-bit-quantized form onto the GPUs vram
2. setup the transformers trainer with this model, and with a hardcoded deepspeed config ilab would come with
3. train for 5 epochs using fusedadam as the optim and deepspeed on top of that.
4. give you a model in safetensors format (we cannot convert a quantized safetensor model)

The big advantage here is more "fine tuned" training than currently exists in the CLI because of deepspeed (or fsdp). The user could even set this up for multi GPU or multi system support with future ilab enhancements.

### ilab model train phased

A user would run something like (assuming phase00 has run) on a GPU enabled server.

`ilab model train phased --device=cuda --model-dir=./phase00/model --data-dir=./phase00/data`
`ilab checkpoint evaluate ./phase05/checkpoints --output-dir=./phase10`
`ilab model train phased --device=cuda --model-dir=./phase10/model --data-dir=./phase10/data`

> ....

Reviewer 2: This is the only place in the doc where `phase00`, `phase05`, and `phase10` are mentioned. I think these could use a more detailed definition of their meaning.

Basically they would run phased with an eval in between. The Eval looks at the checkpoints output by the previous phase and outputs a model dir in the next phase's working directory. 

## Alternatives

> The other alternative is to keep the same train and generate commands and instead add a --backend or --hifi flag to trigger the high fidelity code. The issue here is that ilab train is already overloaded with pytorch, mlx, etc. Adding more switches and dials into the main train code will make it hard to maintain.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The other alternative is to keep the same train and generate commands and instead add a `--backend` or `-hifi` flag to trigger the high fidelity code. The issue here is that ilab train is already overloaded with pytorch, mlx, etc. Adding more switches and dials into the main train code will make it hard to maintain.
```

High Fidelity can run locally on someone's laptop or desktop and even utilize deepspeed if they have GPUs. In a more powerful system, the user can also run it in a container, utilize deepspeed and potentially even distribute the workload accorss machines using torch.distributed.

A key component here too is checkpoint evaluation. We want users to be able to have an understanding of model checkpoints starting with the ability to run evaluation on them in between phased training runs. The output of `ilab checkpoint evaluate` will tell the user what to point `ilab model train phased` arguments towards.

### Reasoning

Plugging into hardware acceleration and multi-phase training is the logical next step for ilab. Ensuring we do this in a clean way that does not overload our current commands is also crucial. Many of the processes in the backend are confusing so we want to abstract some of the steps away from users while also giving them a reasonable amount of choice in configuring these new processes. However, maintaining the current laptop story is important to users without hardware access. Splitting these two paths into separate commands maintains the integrity of each.

> ### ilab model train integrated

Reviewer 7: @cdoern what is the rationale behind `integrated` vs `qlora`? I think integrated introduces more ambiguity than just calling out the exact algorithm being used

Author: @RobotSail had some opinions over qlora vs phased. I think the gist is: one is a training technique the other is an algorithm. The names need to both be training techniques

This command would take something like the following arguments

--gpus=str , describes the amount of GPUs (of what is available) to use for this process. This comes in the form of: 0-1, 8, etc.
--quantize=bool, enabled Qlora which basically loads the model in a quantized form so it can fit on a consumer GPU
--optimizer=str (deepspeed, fsdp) describes the optimizer framework to use during training

> # --ditributed or --containerized, triggers a containerized version of the train workflow with hardcoded dependencies.

Reviewer 7: my understanding based on recent discussions is that we don't want the CLI spinning up and managing any containers

Author: yep, sorry

Currently all training is done via qlora or the like. Adding the following commands will enable higher fidelity training and introduce commands such as data mixing.

This document focuses primarily on training, specifically `ilab train peft` and `ilab train phased`.

## Key Component

### Building off of the InstructLab Structure Redesign

After github.com/instructlab/instructlab/pull/990 is merged, ilab will use a parent -> child command structure. This proposal operates under that new structure.

This is the proposed new structure under the above Enhancement:

```console
ilab
|
|_______model
|       |
|       |____convert
|       |____download
|       |____train (--convert)
|       |____serve   (-i)
|       |____chat
|       |____inference
|       |
|_______data
|       |
|       |____generate
|       |
|_______config
|       |
|       |____init
|       |
|_______tax
|       |
|       |____diff
|       |____check
|       |____download
```

And this would be the structure after these new commands are added:

```console
ilab
|
|_______model
|       |
|       |____convert
|       |____download
|       |____train (--convert)
|       |    |

> |       |    |______peft *

Reviewer 5: Ditto on the positional argument.

|_______config
|       |
|       |____init
|_______tax
|       |
|       |____diff
|       |____check
|       |____download
```

The starred commands are the new ones under the redesigned structure. We are opting to add peft and phased as commands under train and lofi/hifi under generate rather than flags given their completely different functionality and backend structure.

`ilab train peft` would utilize much of the existing upstream training code with the following differences:

- deepseed support
- fsdp support (eventually)
- full evaluation at the end of training
- inter-epoch evaluation using pytorch's built in evaluators that fit for value loss primarily.

`ilab train phased` would utlize much of the backend training code. Primarily doing the following:

- running a single phase of training
- outputting checkpoint dirs for evaluation to be run on
- deepspeed support
- fsdp support.

`ilab train phased` will be used in conjunction with `ilab checkpoint evaluate`. This command will run full scale inter-checkpoint evaluation on the given directory. An output dir will then hold then best checkpoint and all necessary data to run another `ilab train phased` command on.

> Much of the code for `ilab train phased` and `ilab train peft` will live in the CLI, and hopefully will be shared. However, plans to move much of this code to an external training library should eventually happen. This is most likely not in scope for the first version of this work.

Reviewer 5: Is it still the case? Looks like the training repo is around the corner  https://github.com/instructlab/dev-docs/pull/85

### Reasoning

Plugging into hardware acceleration and multi-phase training is the logical next step for ilab. Ensuring we do this in a clean way that does not overload our current commands is also crucial. Many of the processes in the backend are confusing so we want to abstract some of the steps away from users while also giving them a reasonable amount of choice in configuring these new processes. However, maintaining the current laptop story is important to users without hardware access. Splitting these two paths into separate commands maintains the integrity of each.

> Not only maintaining the current laptop story but enhancing it. Qlora by itself is great, but having LoRA based training with the ability to run ZeRO phaes 1-3 or full FSDP accleration given the right hardware will improve the experience for people on 1 or 2 GPU systems (which are quite common).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Not only maintaining the current laptop story but enhancing it. Qlora by itself is great, but having LoRA based training with the ability to run ZeRO phases 1-3 or full FSDP acceleration given the right hardware will improve the experience for people on 1 or 2 GPU systems.
```

Reviewer 5: How do we know that "people on 1 or 2 GPU systems" is common? If we can't easily prove it, I'd suggest to remove it. It's not adding much to your point that the laptop story is important to maintain and enhance.

If we implement two training functions which diverge greatly, the design of the CLI will split and we will virtually be maintaining two different code stacks, so keeping the feature set aligned in every way except the usage of LoRA is a step in the right direction.

### ilab model train integrated

This command would take something like the following arguments

--gpus=str , describes the amount of GPUs (of what is available) to use for this process. This comes in the form of: 0-1, 8, etc.
--quantize=bool, enabled Qlora which basically loads the model in a quantized form so it can fit on a consumer GPU
--accelerator=str (deepspeed, fsdp) describes the optimizer framework to use during training
--learning-rate, int (?)
--batch-len=int
--input-dir=str, describes where the generated+mixed data lives to be trained on.
--model-name=str, name of the model to be output
--output-dir=str, where to put the model after training
--num-epochs=int, the amount of epochs to run in this phase of training
--device=str, the device type to load the model onto: cuda,rocm,cpu,mlx,mps
++ many of the current train flags probably

#### Implementation Specifics

> The Transformers library (which is currently what we use for training along with torch) has options for fsdp, deepspeed, and many of the related arguments currently in use elsewhere in the project. My idea here is to try and use these as best as we can in the CLI rather than make our own custom versions that we then have to maintain.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The Transformers library (which is currently what we use for training along with torch) has options for fsdp, deepspeed, and many of the related arguments currently in use elsewhere in the project. The goal is to try and use these as best as we can in the CLI rather than make our own custom versions that we then have to maintain.
```

There might be a usecase for kicking off some custom deepspeed code for more in depth inter-checkpoint eval. That would be the point of the `phased` command. The phased train command is meant to be run in conjunction with `ilab checkpoint evaluate` which will give the user the best checkpoint to run the next phase on. 

Keep in mind though, this is the community CLI! I feel as though we should try to find a middle ground between server usecases and community usecases. Having the default path in the InstructLab CLI be torch+transformers makes sense for the following usecases:

1. Developer with a Gaming PC:
    * Transformers+Pytorch support Qlora&&FSDP. While deepspeed might be a more "server-rack" use-case, having multi-phase training in the CLI for anyone with a consumer GPU makes sense.
2. Someone interested in ML, has a Homelab, or *anything with 2 GPUs*

>     * Trandformers+Pytorch supports Deepspeed on a single system spreading the training over the GPUs. Any professional or Hobbyist that has 2 GPUs will be looking for this option

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    * Transformers+Pytorch supports Deepspeed on a single system spreading the training over the GPUs. Any professional or Hobbyist that has 2 GPUs will be looking for this option
```

3. The laptop usecase

>     * Maintianing Qlora as the performant training mode for the laptop is crucial as most people cannot handle the full models. However, unlocking some better results by using FSDP+Qlora could improve local results and get people more interested in InstructLab.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    * Maintaining Qlora as the performant training mode for the laptop is crucial as most people cannot handle the full models. However, unlocking some better results by using FSDP+Qlora could improve local results and get people more interested in InstructLab.
```

The transformers library supports the following combinations:

1. LoRA + BitsNBytes Quantized Model + Deepspeed (QLoRA + DeepSpeed)
    - someone with a consumer GPU could get much better training results from using this combo as opposed to torch without deespeed and inter-checkpoint eval

> 2. Lora + FSDP (untested by me)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
2. Lora + FSDP
```

If the transformers library claim the support, let's keep it that way.

3. LoRA + DeepSpeed

>     - This enables native multi-GPU support out of the box. Model Loading, trainer setup, and deepspeed initialization are all handeled by transformers. I have tested this and it works great on something like 2x4090 (3090 too) or 2xA10

Reviewer 5: Can you expend on what "works great" exactly?

> However we also still want to support something like LoRA + no acceleration besdies using something like CUDA, MPS, or MLX. All of the above would be triggered by flags like `--accelerator`, `--device`, etc.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
However we also still want to support something like LoRA + no acceleration besides using something like CUDA, MPS, or MLX. All of the above would be triggered by flags like `--accelerator`, `--device`, etc.
```

The deepspeed config used for peft and phased will be pretty similar but differ in some key ways. Both of these will be hardcoded for the original version.

transformers lets you put "auto" for any field that has a corresponding `TrainingArguments` option. For example the dtype of the model can be passed into the DS config using `bf16: auto` and `fp16: auto`. 

for `ilab model train peft` the DS json config will:
- use ZeRO phase 2
- offload to CPU, since NVME offloading is not guaranteed.
- use a train batch size of 48
- Set FP16 and BF16 to auto, whichever one the model's dtype defaults to will be auto populated into the config.
- optimizer is AdamW with the learning rate and all other params set to auto, these are most commonly set by transformers, especially if you pass in one of pytorch's optimizers to the training arguments.

> - scheduler is WarmupLR with all params set to auto and handeled by transformers.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- scheduler is WarmupLR with all params set to auto and handled by transformers.
```

Using Phase 3 is unecessary here as that deals with larger systems with more data spread over more GPUs, it is also typically slower than Phase 2 due to the sharding of data.

The key pieces of information here is the cpu offloading, the utilization of phase 2, and defaulting to "auto" for most other settings that are not directly related to performance uplifts for single or dual GPU support.

### ilab model train phased

> This command would take roughly the following arguments

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This command would take the following arguments
```

It's the design phase, so let's be more precise.

--accelerator=str (deepspeed, fsdp) describes the accelerator framework to use during training
--device=str , accelerator to use cpu,cuda,rocm,mlx,mps
--model-dir=path , dir where the model to be used in this phase is located
--data-dir=path , dir where the data for this phase is located

Note there is no LoRA in this command and there is no quantization. The `ilab model train peft` command will use the transformers library with pytorch. This is because those have awesome plugins for deepspeed and fsdp WITH lora and qlora. Those are absolute necessities for community usecase. However, they will be mostly unused in the "High Fidelity" usecase.

`ilab model train phased` will opt to use torchrun under the hood, stepping away from the transformers library a bit. Though, research in future versions will most likely lead to a convergance between the two since transformers paired with torch can do most of the tasks we manually shell out to torchrun and torch.distriuted for. 

> The DeepSpeed config currently used for `ilab model train phased` will have more hardcoded values, until flags are added in later versions allowing users to configure things like the trianing batch size, offloading optimizer etc. with PEFT most of that is handeled using the `auto` keyword that transformers can funnel defaults into.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The DeepSpeed config currently used for `ilab model train phased` will have more hardcoded values, until flags are added in later versions allowing users to configure things like the training batch size, offloading optimizer etc. with PEFT most of that is handled using the `auto` keyword that transformers can funnel defaults into.
```

`ilab model train peft --device=cuda --quantize --accelerator=deepspeed --num-epochs=5`

This would 
1. load the model in 4-bit-quantized form onto the GPUs vram
2. setup the transformers trainer with this model, and with a hardcoded deepspeed config ilab would come with
3. train for 5 epochs using AdamW as the optim and deepspeed on top of that.
4. give you a model in safetensors format (we cannot convert a quantized safetensor model)

The big advantage here is faster and higher fidelity training than currently exists in the CLI because of deepspeed (or fsdp). The user could even set this up for multi GPU or multi system support with future ilab enhancements.

`ilab model train peft --device=cuda --accelerator=deepspeed --num-epochs=5`

This would 
1. load the model in its full form to the GPUs vram (multiple GPUs in this case)
2. setup the transformers trainer with this model, and with a hardcoded deepspeed config ilab would come with
3. train for 5 epochs using AdamW as the optim and deepspeed on top of that.
4. give you a model in safetensors format or GGUF format since this is not a bitsnbytes model.

> The big advantage here is faster and higher fidelity training than currently exists in the CLI because of deepspeed (or fsdp). The user could even set this up for multi GPU or multi system support with future ilab enhancements.

Reviewer 5: The benefits from this approach look similar to the ones when using `--quantize`, can we add more on the gains?

### ilab model train phased

A user would run something like (assuming phase00 has run) on a GPU enabled server.

`ilab model train phased --device=cuda --model-dir=./phase00/model --data-dir=./phase00/data`
`ilab checkpoint evaluate ./phase05/checkpoints --output-dir=./phase10`
`ilab model train phased --device=cuda --model-dir=./phase10/model --data-dir=./phase10/data`
....

Basically they would run phased with an eval in between. The Eval looks at the checkpoints output by the previous phase and outputs a model dir in the next phase's working directory. 

### ilab model evaluate full AND ilab model evaluate checkpoint

This command will take something like the following flags:

--benchmarks [mmlu, mt, pr-mmlu, pr-bench (mt-pr)] default: (mmlu)
    - you can only run certain benchmarks depending on what type of evaluation you are doing. 

> Note: We could have `ilab model evaluate` as a single command and take flags that depend on eachother like `--checkpoint-dir` and `--benchmarks` but in general, with the new CLI design we are trying to get out of the habit of flags that depend on eachother.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Note: We could have `ilab model evaluate` as a single command and take flags that depend on each other like `--checkpoint-dir` and `--benchmarks` but in general, with the new CLI design we are trying to get out of the habit of flags that depend on each other.
```
